Pali,English,Type
majjhima,middle
nikāya,collection
uparipaṇṇāsapāḷi,
anupadavaggo,
watery land
kāyagatāsatisuttaṃ,
relating to the body
mn,
-
evaṁ,thus
me,to me
sutaṁ,hear
ekaṁ,one
samayaṁ,time
bhagavā,blessed
sāvatthiyaṁ,in Kosala
viharati,dwells
jetavane,jetagrove
anāthapiṇḍikassa,anāthapiṇḍika
ārāme,park
atha,then
kho,indeed
sambahulānaṁ,many
bhikkhūnaṁ,
pacchābhattaṁ,afternoon
piṇḍapātapaṭikkantānaṁ,alms.back from
upaṭṭhānasālāyaṁ,assembly hall
sannisinnānaṁ,settled
sannipatitānaṁ,assembled
ayamantarākathā,them.discussion
udapādi,arose
acchariyaṁ,wonderful
āvuso,friend
abbhutaṁ,marvelous
yāvañcidaṁ,as far as
tena,because of
bhagavatā,blessed
jānatā,know
passatā,see
arahatā,worthy
sammāsambuddhena,perfect.enlightened
kāyagatāsati,body.direct.mindful
bhāvitā,developed
bahulīkatā,increased
mahapphalā,great.fruit
vuttā,habit
mahānisaṁsā,great.benifit
ayañca,then.and
hidaṁ,this
tesaṁ,that
antarākathā,between talk
vippakatā,unfinished
hoti,to be
sāyanhasamayaṁ,evening
paṭisallānā,seclusion
vuṭṭhito,emerged from
yena,because of
upaṭṭhānasālā,assembly hall
tenupasaṅkami,approach
upasaṅkamitvā,approached
paññatte,prepared
āsane,seat
nisīdi,sat down
nisajja,having sat
bhikkhū,
āmantesi,address
kāya,body
nuttha,(affirm. part.)
bhikkhave,
etarahi,at present
kathāya,talk
sannisinnā,settled
kā,which
ca,and
pana,yet
vo,to you
idha,here
bhante,Sir
amhākaṁ,we are
ayaṁ,this
no,(neg)
anuppatto,arrived
kathaṁ,and how
bhikkhu,
araññagato,go forest
vā,or
rukkhamūlagato,foot tree
suññāgāragato,empty.house.go
nisīdati,sit down
pallaṅkaṁ,cross-leg
ābhujitvā,bent
ujuṁ,up-right
kāyaṁ,the body
paṇidhāya,have aspired
parimukhaṁ,round.mouth
satiṁ,mindful
upaṭṭhapetvā,put forth
so,he
satova,mindful
assasati,inhales
passasati,exhales
dīghaṁ,long
assasanto,inhale
assasāmī,inhale
pajānāti,know clearly
passasanto,exhale
passasāmī,exhale
rassaṁ,short
sabbakāyapaṭisaṁvedī,all.body.experience
assasissāmī,inhales
sikkhati,trains
passasissāmī,exhales
passambhayaṁ,calms down
kāyasaṅkhāraṁ,body.formation
tassa,he
appamattassa,careful
ātāpino,ardent
pahitattassa,able.truth
viharato,abides
ye,whatever
gehasitā,family life
sarasaṅkappā,memory.intention
te,his
pahīyanti,abandoned
pahānā,removal
ajjhattameva,internally
cittaṁ,mind
santiṭṭhati,steadied
sannisīdati,settled
ekodi,single
samādhiyati,concentrated
kāyagatāsatiṁ,relate to body
bhāveti,develops
puna,again
caparaṁ,then
gacchanto,walking
gacchāmī,walk.I
ṭhito,stand
ṭhitomhī,stand.I
nisinno,sat
nisinnomhī,sit.I
sayāno,sleeping
sayānomhī,sleep.I
yathā,as
panassa,
kāyo,body
paṇihito,directed
tathā,so
naṁ,not
evampi,that.to
abhikkante,approaching
paṭikkante,gone back
sampajānakārī,mindful
ālokite,look ahead
vilokite,look back
samiñjite,moves
pasārite,stretch
saṅghāṭipattacīvaradhāraṇe,outrobe.bowl.robe.carry
asite,eat
pīte,drink
khāyite,consume
sāyite,taste
uccārapassāvakamme,excrete.urinate
gate,walk
ṭhite,stand
nisinne,sat down
sutte,sleep
jāgarite,awake
bhāsite,speak
tuṇhībhāve,silent
imameva,this
uddhaṁ,upward
pādatalā,sole foot
adho,below
kesamatthakā,hair.head
tacapariyantaṁ,skin.bound
pūraṁ,full
nānappakārassa,of many kind
asucino,unclean
paccavekkhati,contemplate
atthi,exist
imasmiṁ,this
kāye,body
kesā,headhair
lomā,bodyhair
nakhā,nail
dantā,teeth
taco,skin
maṁsaṁ,flesh
nhāru,sinew
aṭṭhi,bone
aṭṭhimiñjaṁ,bonemarrow
vakkaṁ,kidney
hadayaṁ,heart
yakanaṁ,liver
kilomakaṁ,pleura
pihakaṁ,spleen
papphāsaṁ,lungs
antaṁ,intestine
antaguṇaṁ,mesentery
udariyaṁ,undig. food
karīsaṁ,excrement
pittaṁ,bile
semhaṁ,phlegm
pubbo,pus
lohitaṁ,blood
sedo,sweat
medo,fat
assu,tears
vasā,grease
kheḷo,saliva
siṅghāṇikā,mucus
lasikā,synovic fluid
muttan,urine
seyyathāpi,just as
ubhatomukhā,double mouthed
putoḷi,bag
pūrā,full
nānāvihitassa,various
dhaññassa,grain
seyyathidaṁ,such as
sālīnaṁ,fine rice
vīhīnaṁ,paddy
muggānaṁ,green pea
māsānaṁ,bean
tilānaṁ,sesamum
taṇḍulānaṁ,rice-grain
tamenaṁ,
cakkhumā,with.eyes
puriso,man
muñcitvā,loosened
paccavekkheyya,reviews
ime,this
sālī,fine rice
vīhī,paddy
muggā,green pea
māsā,bean
tilā,sesamum 
taṇḍulā,rice-grain
evameva,only
yathāṭhitaṁ,as it stand
yathāpaṇihitaṁ,as it directed
dhātuso,element
pathavīdhātu,earth.elem
āpodhātu,water.elem
tejodhātu,fire.elem
vāyodhātū,air.elem
dakkho,skilled
goghātako,butcher
goghātakantevāsī,butcher.pupil
gāviṁ,cow
vadhitvā,have killed
catumahāpathe,4.road
bilaso,portions
vibhajitvā,have dissected
assa,to be
passeyya,aside
sarīraṁ,the body
sivathikāya,safe.body
chaḍḍitaṁ,abandoned
ekāhamataṁ,one day
dvīhamataṁ,two days
tīhamataṁ,three days
uddhumātakaṁ,bloated
vinīlakaṁ,discolored
vipubbakajātaṁ,festering
upasaṁharati,compare
ayampi,this.also
evaṁdhammo,this.nature
evaṁbhāvī,this.become
evaṁanatīto,this.not.overcome
kākehi,crow
khajjamānaṁ,consumed 
kulalehi,hawk
gijjhehi,vulture
kaṅkehi,heron
sunakhehi, dog
byagghehi,tiger
dīpīhi,panther
siṅgālehi,jackel
vividhehi,various
pāṇakajātehi,insect
aṭṭhikasaṅkhalikaṁ,bone.chain
samaṁsalohitaṁ,with.flesh.blood
nhārusambandhaṁ,sinew.connect
nimmaṁsalohitamakkhitaṁ,without.flesh.blood.smear
apagatamaṁsalohitaṁ,removed.flesh.blood
aṭṭhikāni,bone
apagatasambandhāni,removed.connection
disāvidisāvikkhittāni,directions.upset
aññena,other
hatthaṭṭhikaṁ,hand.bone
pādaṭṭhikaṁ,leg.bone
gopphakaṭṭhikaṁ,ankle.bone
jaṅghaṭṭhikaṁ,shine.bone
ūruṭṭhikaṁ,thigh.bone
kaṭiṭṭhikaṁ,hip.bone
phāsukaṭṭhikaṁ,rib.bone
piṭṭhiṭṭhikaṁ,back.bone
khandhaṭṭhikaṁ,breast.bone
gīvaṭṭhikaṁ,neck.bone
hanukaṭṭhikaṁ,jaw.bone
dantaṭṭhikaṁ,tooth.bone
sīsakaṭāhaṁ,skull.bone
setāni,white
saṅkhavaṇṇapaṭibhāgāni,conch.color.resemble
puñjakitāni,heap
terovassikāni,3.year
pūtīni,rotten
cuṇṇakajātāni,powder.arisen
vivicceva,separate from
kāmehi,pleasures
vivicca,separate from
akusalehi,unskilful
dhammehi,states
savitakkaṁ,with.applied
savicāraṁ,with.investigate
vivekajaṁ,secluded
pītisukhaṁ,rapture.joy
paṭhamaṁ,first
jhānaṁ,jhāna
upasampajja,have attained
vivekajena,seclusion
pītisukhena,rapture.joy
abhisandeti,overflow
parisandeti,fill
paripūreti,become full
parippharati,completely
nāssa,no.is
kiñci,that
sabbāvato,entire
kāyassa,body
apphuṭaṁ,unpervaded
nhāpako,bathman
nhāpakantevāsī,bathman.pupil
kaṁsathāle,metal dish
nhānīyacuṇṇāni,bath.powder
ākiritvā,pour
udakena,water
paripphosakaṁ,completely
sanneyya,mixes
sāyaṁ,with.it
nhānīyapiṇḍi,bath.ball
snehānugatā,moise.accompanied
snehaparetā,moise.overcome
santarabāhirā,pervaded
phuṭā, permeate
snehena,moist
na,not
pagghariṇī,ooze
vitakkavicārānaṁ,apply.investigate
vūpasamā,allaying
ajjhattaṁ,self
sampasādanaṁ,tranquilizing
cetaso,mind
ekodibhāvaṁ,onepointedness
avitakkaṁ,not.applied
avicāraṁ,not.investigate
samādhijaṁ,from concentration
dutiyaṁ,second
samādhijena,from concentration
udakarahado,water.lake
gambhīro,deep
ubbhidodako,welling-up
nevassa,not.it
puratthimāya,eastern
disāya,direction
udakassa,water
āyamukhaṁ,inflow
pacchimāya,western
uttarāya,northern
dakkhiṇāya,southern
kālena,time
kālaṁ,time
sammā,is appeased
dhāraṁ,showers
anuppaveccheyya,supply
tamhāva,that
udakarahadā,water.lake
sītā,cool
vāridhārā,rain cloud
ubbhijjitvā,springs up
tameva,it.even
udakarahadaṁ,water.lake
sītena,cool
vārinā,water
abhisandeyya,overflow
parisandeyya,fill
paripūreyya,become full
paripphareyya,completely
udakarahadassa,water.lake
pītiyā,joy
virāgā,dispassion
upekkhako,equanimity
sato,mindful
sampajāno,full aware
sukhañca,happy.and
kāyena,body
paṭisaṁvedeti,experience
yaṁ,which
taṁ,that
ariyā,noble
ācikkhanti,relates
satimā,mindful
sukhavihārī,pleasant.abide
tatiyaṁ,third
nippītikena,free.joy
sukhena,happiness
uppaliniyaṁ,lotuspond
paduminiyaṁ,lotus
puṇḍarīkiniyaṁ,white lotus
appekaccāni,some
uppalāni,waterlily
padumāni,lotus
having lotuses
puṇḍarīkāni,white lotus
udake,water
jātāni,arisen
saṁvaḍḍhāni,grown up
udakānuggatāni,water.above
antonimuggaposīni,within
tāni,that
yāva,which
caggā,and.tips
mūlā,and.roots
abhisannāni,overflow
parisannāni,drench
paripūrāni,fill
paripphuṭāni,completely
sabbāvataṁ,entire
uppalānaṁ,waterlily
padumānaṁ,lotus
puṇḍarīkānaṁ,white lotus
sukhassa,happiness
pubbeva,prior
somanassadomanassānaṁ,joy.grief
atthaṅgamā,setting down
adukkhamasukhaṁ,pleasure.pain
upekkhāsatipārisuddhiṁ,equanimity.mindful.pure
catutthaṁ,fourth
parisuddhena,purified
cetasā,mind
pariyodātena,pure.bright
pharitvā,pervaded
odātena,white
vatthena,cloth
sasīsaṁ,upto head
pārupitvā,cover
yassa,anyone
kassaci,who
antogadhāvāssa,included
kusalā,good
dhammā,states
keci,which
vijjābhāgiyā,true knowledge
mahāsamuddo,great.ocean
phuṭo,pervaded
kunnadiyo,stream
yā,whatever
kāci,which
samuddaṅgamā,ocean.go
abhāvitā,not developed
abahulīkatā,not cultivate
labhati,attains
māro,Māra
otāraṁ,access
ārammaṇaṁ,foundation
garukaṁ,heavy
silāguḷaṁ,stone.ball
allamattikāpuñje,wet.clay.mound
pakkhipeyya,throws into
kiṁ,who
maññatha,imagines
api,and even
nu,(affirm)
labhetha,attains
otāran,access
sukkhaṁ,dry
kaṭṭhaṁ,piece wood
koḷāpaṁ,sapless
āgaccheyya,comes to
uttarāraṇiṁ,upper.firestick
ādāya,have taken
aggiṁ,fire
abhinibbattessāmi,produce
tejo,heat
pātukarissāmī,manifest
amuṁ,up to
abhimanthento,agitate
abhinibbatteyya,produced
pātukareyyā,manifest
udakamaṇiko,water.jar
ritto,empty
tuccho,devoid
ādhāre,stand
ṭhapito,placed
udakabhāraṁ,water.load
nikkhepanan,put down
lahukaṁ,light
suttaguḷaṁ,string.ball
sabbasāramaye,all.pith.made
aggaḷaphalake,door panel
hetaṁ,indeed.this
allaṁ,wet
sasnehaṁ,with.oily
pūro,full
samatittiko,brimful
kākapeyyo,crow.drinkable
abhiññāsacchikaraṇīyassa,high-knowledge.fit to know
dhammassa,nature
abhininnāmeti,towards
abhiññāsacchikiriyāya,high-knowledge.fit to know
ta,that
tatre,there
sakkhibhabbataṁ,witness.ability
pāpuṇāti,attains
sati,mindful
satiāyatane,mindfl.sphere
balavā,powerful
yato,since
āviñcheyya,turn
udakan,water
tatra,there
tatreva,therin
same,level
bhūmibhāge,plot o'land
caturassā,square
pokkharaṇī,pond
āḷibandhā,embank.bound
samatittikā,brimful
kākapeyyā,crow.drinkable
āḷiṁ,embankment
muñceyya,release
subhūmiyaṁ,well.ground
ājaññaratho,good breed.chariot
yutto,yoked
odhastapatodo,lying.goad
yoggācariyo,suitable
assadammasārathi,horse.tamed.driver
abhiruhitvā,ascends
vāmena,left
hatthena,hand
rasmiyo,rein
gahetvā,have taken
dakkhiṇena,right
patodaṁ,goad
yenicchakaṁ,where.desire
yadicchakaṁ,if.desire
sāreyyāpi,move along
paccāsāreyyāpi,make go
kāyagatāya,body.directed
satiyā,mindful
āsevitāya,frequent.pract
bhāvitāya,develope
bahulīkatāya,cultivate
yānīkatāya,made a habit of
mastered
vatthukatāya,made basis
anuṭṭhitāya,
1. not risen up. 2. done
paricitāya,accumulate
susamāraddhāya,well undertaken
dasānisaṁsā,ten.benefit
pāṭikaṅkhā,expect
one who desires or expects
i,
-
aratiratisaho,
non-attachment
aversion
arati,
non-attachment
aversion
sahati,
enduring
bears
endures
to be able
to overcome
bearing
enduring
bore
endured
uppannaṁ,
reborn
arisen
aratiṁ,
non-attachment
aversion
abhibhuyya,
conqueror
overlord
ii,
-
bhayabheravasaho,
fear
fright
bhayabheravaṁ,
fear
fright
iii,
-
khamo,
forgiving
enduring
bearing
is patient
endures
forbears
pardons
being patient
enduring
forbearing
pardoning
tolerance
patience
endurance
was patient
endured
forbore
pardoned
sītassa,
cool
cold. (nt.) coolness
cold
a furrow
uṇhassa,
hot. (nt.)
heat
jighacchāya,
is hungry
desires to eat. [ghas + cha
g is doubled and the first g is changed to ji. the s of the root becomes c.
hunger
had a desire to eat
pipāsāya,
thirst
ḍaṁsamakasavātātapasarīsapasamphassānaṁ,
flied
duruttānaṁ,
badly spoken. (nt.) bad speech
durāgatānaṁ,
antithetic prefix implying badness
perverseness
and difficulty
vacanapathānaṁ,
the way of saying
uppannānaṁ,
reborn
arisen
sārīrikānaṁ,
connected with the body
vedanānaṁ,
pain
sensation
dukkhānaṁ,
suffering
pain
misery
agony
discomfort
afflicted
grieved
unhappy
dejected
ailing
tibbānaṁ,
sharp
piercing
acute
kharānaṁ,
rough
hard
sharp
painful
kaṭukānaṁ,
sharp
severe
painful
pungent
asātānaṁ,
disagreeable. (nt.) pain
suffering
amanāpānaṁ,
detesful
pāṇaharānaṁ,
taking away life
adhivāsakajātiko,
enduring
patient
iv,
-
catunnaṁ,
and
then
now
jhānānaṁ,
concentration of mind
meditation (on a religious subject)
ābhicetasikānaṁ,
light
lustre
radiance
shines
radiates
shone
radiated
diṭṭhadhammasukhavihārānaṁ,
this world. (adj.) one who has realised the final truth
nikāmalābhī,
one who has obtained something without difficulty
akicchalābhī,
did
made
or performed
akasiralābhī,
did
made
or performed
v,
blows
emits some smell
wanes
disappears
anekavihitaṁ,
of different kinds
various
iddhividhaṁ,
prosperous
opulent
successful
prosperity
potency
psychic power
paccānubhoti,
is cooked
suffers
was cooked
suffered
comes to
realizes
falls back
came on to
realized
fell back
ekopi,
-
hutvā,
having been
bahudhā,
in many ways
bahudhāpi,
in many ways
eko,
-
āvibhāvaṁ,
-
tirobhāvaṁ,
concealment
disappearance
tirokuṭṭaṁ,
across
beyond
outside
tiropākāraṁ,
across
beyond
outside
tiropabbataṁ,
further side of a mountain or rock
asajjamāno,
not touching with
not clinging
gacchati,
a plant
a shrub
goes
moves
walks
going
moving
walking
went
moved
walked
ākāse,
the sky
space
pathaviyāpi,
the earth
ummujjanimujjaṁ,
emerging and diving
karoti,
1. the hand
2. a ray
3. a tax
4. the trunk of an elephant. (adj.)
(in cpds.)
doing
performing
did
acted
made
built
an elephant
does
acts
makes
builds
doing
acting
making
building
udakepi,
water
abhijjamāne,
not breaking or separating
pathaviyaṁ,
the earth
ākāsepi,
the sky
space
pallaṅkena,
a sofa
a coach
a cross-legged sitting
kamati,
(in cpds.)
wish
longing
pakkhī,
a cripple
a lamp person
side
party
faction
side of the body
a flank
a wing
a fortnight. (adj.) adherent
associated with
a bird
the winged one
sakuṇo,
a bird
a she-bird
imepi,
-
candimasūriye,
the moon
evaṁmahiddhike,
(emphatic particle)
only
evaṁmahānubhāve,
(emphatic particle)
only
pāṇinā,
life
breath
a living being
the hand
the palm
a living being
parimasati,
all round
altogether
completely
parimajjati,
strokes
rubs
polishes
wipes off or out
stroked
rubbed
polished
wiped off or out
brahmalokāpi,
the brahma world
vasaṁ,
control
influence
authority
lives
abides
dwells
stays
the spring
the fat
grease
lived
abided
dwelt
stayed
mastering
having power
wealth
vatteti,
exercising
keeping on
vi,
blows
emits some smell
wanes
disappears
dibbāya,
divine
celestial
sports
amuses oneself
sported
amused oneself
sotadhātuyā,
the ear. (m.)
a stream
torrent
flood
hearer
visuddhāya,
clean
pure
bright
stainless
sanctified
purity
holiness
splendour
excellency
atikkantamānusikāya,
went beyond
passed over
overcame
surpassed
ubho,
-
sadde,
sound
noise
a word
suṇāti,
a dog
hearing
hears
heard
dibbe,
divine
celestial
sports
amuses oneself
sported
amused oneself
mānuse,
human (m.)
a man
a woman
dūre,
distant
far. (nt.)
distance
santike,
near. (nt.)
vicinity
presence
vii,
blows
emits some smell
wanes
disappears
parasattānaṁ,
hatchet
parapuggalānaṁ,
other
another
foreign
alien
outsider
ceto,
is the form that ceta takes in cpds
paricca,
distinguished or understood
sarāgaṁ,
lustful
cittan,
mind
thought
(m.)
name of a month: March-April. (adj.)
variegated
manifold
beautiful. (nt.)
a painting
picture
vītarāgaṁ,
passionless. (m.) a saint
sadosaṁ,
(nom. sing.) of ta in (mas.) is often seen in this form
e.g. sa ve kāsāvam arahati
vītadosaṁ,
woven. (pp. of ?)
free from
being without
samohaṁ,
infatuated
vītamohaṁ,
without ignorance
saṁkhittaṁ,
(nom. sing.) of ta in (mas.) is often seen in this form
e.g. sa ve kāsāvam arahati
vikkhittaṁ,
upset
perplexed
mahaggataṁ,
become great
lofty
amahaggataṁ,
1. prefix ā shortened before a double consonant. 2. a negative prefixed to nouns
adjectives
and participles. 3. the augment prefixed to some roots in the Past and Conditional Tenses
e.g. akāsi
up to. (prep.) from
towards
sauttaraṁ,
(nom. sing.) of ta in (mas.) is often seen in this form
e.g. sa ve kāsāvam arahati
anuttaraṁ,
incomparable
unsurpassed
samāhitaṁ,
settled
composed
collected of mind
asamāhitaṁ,
not composed
vimuttaṁ,
released
emancipated
release
deliverance
emancipation
avimuttaṁ,
"openly
"" before ones eyes"
viii,
blows
emits some smell
wanes
disappears
pubbenivāsaṁ,
ones former state of existence
anussarati,
remembers
remembering
remembered
ekampi,
-
jātiṁ,
born
arisen
become
occurred
happened. (nt.)
a collection or variety
birth
rebirth
race
nation
genealogy
a sort of
a kind of
dvepi,
the two
jātiyo,
born
arisen
become
occurred
happened. (nt.)
a collection or variety
birth
rebirth
race
nation
genealogy
a sort of
a kind of
tissopi,
that
(so = he
sā = she
taṃ = that thing
are some forms of this)
catassopi,
and
then
now
pañcapi,
five
dasapi,
ten
vīsampi,
blows
emits some smell
wanes
disappears
tiṁsampi,
that
(so = he
sā = she
taṃ = that thing
are some forms of this)
cattārīsampi,
given up
sacrificed
paññāsampi,
wise
endowed with knowledge. (in cpds.)
wisdom
knowledge
insight
jātisatampi,
born
arisen
become
occurred
happened. (nt.)
a collection or variety
birth
rebirth
race
nation
genealogy
a sort of
a kind of
jātisahassampi,
born
arisen
become
occurred
happened. (nt.)
a collection or variety
birth
rebirth
race
nation
genealogy
a sort of
a kind of
jātisatasahassampi,
born
arisen
become
occurred
happened. (nt.)
a collection or variety
birth
rebirth
race
nation
genealogy
a sort of
a kind of
anekepi,
many
various
saṁvaṭṭakappe,
(nom. sing.) of ta in (mas.) is often seen in this form
e.g. sa ve kāsāvam arahati
vivaṭṭakappe,
an ascending aeon
saṁvaṭṭavivaṭṭakappe,
(nom. sing.) of ta in (mas.) is often seen in this form
e.g. sa ve kāsāvam arahati
amutrāsiṁ,
in such and such a place
evaṁnāmo,
(emphatic particle)
only
evaṁgotto,
(emphatic particle)
only
evaṁvaṇṇo,
(emphatic particle)
only
evamāhāro,
(emphatic particle)
only
evaṁsukhadukkhappaṭisaṁvedī,
(emphatic particle)
only
evamāyupariyanto,
(emphatic particle)
only
tato,
from there
from that
thence
therefore
thereupon
cuto,
fallen away
shifted
shifting
passing away
vanishing
amutra,
in such and such a place
udapādiṁ,
arose
originated
tatrāpāsiṁ,
extended
spread out
idhūpapanno,
-
iti,
thus. (used to point out something just mentioned or about to be mentioned
and to show that a sentence is finished). Very often its former i is elided and ti only is remaining
sākāraṁ,
vegetable
pot herb
sauddesaṁ,
(nom. sing.) of ta in (mas.) is often seen in this form
e.g. sa ve kāsāvam arahati
ix,
-
dibbena,
divine
celestial
sports
amuses oneself
sported
amused oneself
cakkhunā,
the eye
visuddhena,
clean
pure
bright
stainless
sanctified
purity
holiness
splendour
excellency
atikkantamānusakena,
went beyond
passed over
overcame
surpassed
satte,
(the number)
seven
1. ability
power
strength
2. a spear
a dagger
an enemy
parched flour
passati,
side
flank
sees
finds
understands
saw
found
understood
cavamāne,
falling away
shifting
upapajjamāne,
to be reborn in
rises
rose
hīne,
diminished
dwindled
wasted away. (adj.)
low
inferior
base
despicable
paṇīte,
excellent
delicious
suvaṇṇe,
gold. (adj.)
of good colour
beautiful
dubbaṇṇe,
of bad colour
discoloured
ugly
sugate,
faring well
happy. (m.)
the Buddha
a happy state
righteous
duggate,
poor
miserable
a realm of miserable existence
yathākammūpage,
as
like
in relation to
according to
in whatever way
just as
x,
-
āsavānaṁ,
1. that which flows
2. spirit
3. discharge from a sore
4. ideas which intoxicate the mind
flows
flowed
khayā,
waste
destruction
decay
consummation of
anāsavaṁ,
free from intoxicants
passionless
cetovimuttiṁ,
emancipation of heart
paññāvimuttiṁ,
emancipation through insight
diṭṭheva,
seen
found
understood. (nt.)
vision
dogma
theory
belief
dhamme,
doctrine
nature
truth
the Norm
morality
good conduct
sayaṁ,
sleeps
lies down
sleeping
laying down
slept
abhiññā,
knowing
possessed of knowledge
special knowledge
supernormal power
sacchikatvā,
having realised
having experienced for oneself
idamavoca,
-
attamanā,
delighted
glad
bhagavato,
fortunate. (m.)
the Buddha
bhāsitaṁ,
said
spoken
shone. (nt.)
saying
one who says or speaks
abhinandunti,
rejoices at
finds pleasure in
approves of
rejoiced at
one who rejoices
enjoying
kāyagatāsatisuttaṁ,
relating to the body
niṭṭhitaṁ,
was finished
was completed
navamaṁ,
ninth
the ninth day of a lunar month
